As an epic work, the Shahnameh does not promote a pacifist view of life. The
Shahnameh cites war as a reality in human history. Ferdowsi’s theory of just war has
its foundation in the preservation and expansion of universal justice. According to the Shahnameh, there
are two reasons to go to war: defending land and dignity and penal or corrective
justice.
This is Alkus. He is a cocky Turanian hero who keeps on rambling about how
strong he is and how he can defeat Rustam, the greatest hero in the Shahnameh
world. During the fight between the Iranians and Turanians his opportunity arises but he fails
miserably and is killed almost immediately.
This is Rustam, the defender and savior of Iran and Iran’s greatest champion. He is
the son of Zal and Rudabah, who is a descendant of Zahhak, the serpent king.
This makes him a half foreigner with a partially demonic ancestry. Unlike the other conventionally
chivalrous hero’s written about in the Shahnameh, Rustam inhabits a primitive ethos. Unlike other heroes
he can be overbearing towards inferiors, he can be grossly disrespectful to his superiors and
he does not hide his contempt for those he despises, and he gets drunk and
has been described as a trickster hero by many others.
On his head, Rustam wears a rather unconventional helmet. This helmet is the hollowed out
severed head of the White Div he defeated at the end of his seven trials.
Now let us get back to the image. As already said, Rustam loves to drink.
After a day of drinking and feasting, Rustam and seven of his warriors decide that
going hunting is the best idea in the world. Rather than hunting on Iranian
land, he decides to ignore all the rules as he always does and decides to
hunt on the lands of the enemy, King Afrasiyab. Their hunting trip does not
go unnoticed and they are confronted by a large army. Rustam is on the roll
, going across the battle field killing all the foot soldiers, but when the legendary Turanian
heroes Pilsam and Alkus appear, things get serious. Alkus takes on Rustam’s brother, Zawara, and
just as he is about to be killed, Rustam swoops in and a fight between
Alkus and Rustam ensues. Alkus,  "thrusting with a spear at Rustam’s girdle, He failed
to pierce the mail, while Rustam thrust A spear at his foe’s head and dashed him
down as t’were a mountain-crag to earth”
Armor is important to every warrior, but unlike other heroes of the Shahnamah, Rustam does
not wear a metal armor like the one Alkus wears, but the famous babr-e bayan,
his tiger skin. This has been described as the skin of a fabulous animal, a
kind of dragon, probably of Indian origin, which was thought to give invincibility on anyone
who wore it. Many tricksters are associated with specific animals whose skins or feathers they
may wear in order to draw on the animal's characteristics for their own purposes. The
animals used are usually known for their slyness.
A pair of bāzuband was used in Iran for protecting the forearms during combat.
A bāzuband has a main steel plate covering the whole forearm, normally with one or
two smaller plates to encircle and close around the wrist, and a textile gauntlet reinforced
with mail for protecting the hands.
The armour protecting the shin was called sāqedin.
The Iranian helmets from the period following the Mongol Invasion in the 13th century had
a round dome ending at the top with either a pointed tuft or a protruding spike
These helmets had mail or leather aventails to protect the neck and face.
According to Ferdowsi, without war there will be few measures with which to test heroism
and we would not get to know the greatness of these past hereos.